🛠️ Step-by-Step Plan:
1. Set Up the Rails Application
First, let's get the basic project structure up and running.

Task: Create a new Rails project.

Command:

bash
Copy
Edit
rails new finance_tracker --database=postgresql
Goal: Set up the Rails application with PostgreSQL as the database.

2. Add Authentication (Devise)
Since user authentication is a key feature, we’ll add Devise for sign-up, login, and password management.

Task: Install Devise gem for authentication.

Command:

bash
Copy
Edit
gem 'devise'
Then run the following commands to generate the Devise views and models:

bash
Copy
Edit
rails generate devise:install
rails generate devise User
rails db:migrate
Goal: Set up authentication with user sign-up and login pages.

3. Create Transaction Model & Categories
This is the core part of your app — managing income and expense records.

Task: Create the Transaction model to store financial transactions.

Command:

bash
Copy
Edit
rails generate model Transaction amount:decimal category:string transaction_type:string date:datetime user:references
Add the user:references to associate transactions with users.

Goal: Set up the model and run migrations.

4. Add Categories for Transactions
You want to allow users to categorize transactions (e.g., "Food", "Travel").

Task: You can either hardcode categories or make them dynamic.

For Dynamic Categories:

Create a Category model.

Create an association between Transaction and Category (one-to-many relationship).

Goal: Allow users to assign transactions to categories.

5. Set Up Basic Views & Controller Actions
Now that we have the models, we need to create controllers and views.

Task: Create a TransactionsController.

In this controller, you'll handle actions like index (viewing transactions), new (adding a transaction), create, edit, and update.

For the dashboard and transactions view:

index.html.erb (list all transactions)

new.html.erb (form to add new transactions)

Goal: Display transactions in the dashboard.

6. Create a Dashboard for Users
On the dashboard, users should see a summary of their financial situation.

Task: Build a simple DashboardController that:

Displays total income/expenses

Provides links to view individual transactions or add new ones

Optionally displays monthly reports

Goal: A clean overview of the user's finances.

7. Generate Reports
Generating monthly financial reports is a key feature.

Task: Use Ruby's date and time features to filter transactions by month/year.

You could use group_by to categorize transactions and display totals.

Use a gem like Chartkick for charts (you mentioned charts earlier).

Goal: Display spending patterns, income vs. expenses over time.

8. Optional Features: Export to CSV and Budgeting Goals
You can optionally add export functionality and budget goals for users.

Task:

Implement CSV export using ruby's CSV library.

Create a model for setting budget goals (e.g., BudgetGoal model).

Goal: Allow users to export their data or set goals.

9. Styling the Application
For the frontend, we can use Bootstrap or Tailwind (whichever you prefer).

Task: Implement basic styles using Bootstrap or Tailwind for responsiveness.

Goal: Make the app visually appealing and responsive.

📅 Our Work Plan (in Phases)
Phase 1: Setting Up Basics & Authentication

Create the Rails app.

Set up Devise authentication.

Generate models for transactions and categories.

Phase 2: Building Core Features

Implement the Transactions controller and views (CRUD).

Create the Dashboard with a financial summary.

Start building monthly report views.

Phase 3: Reports & Export Features

Add monthly financial reports.

Implement CSV export.

Add budget goals (optional).

Phase 4: Frontend Styling

Integrate Bootstrap or Tailwind CSS for styling.

Phase 5: Testing & Bug Fixes

Test core features like authentication, transactions, and reports.

